Just one.
I'll just wait till we give them
and then I'll give our introductions.
Alright. Uh, Mr. Rhodes is there?
Yep, I'm here. Oh, good. Alright. Welcome.
Okay, so, um, welcome to the Petitions committee.
I'm Greg O'Connelly chair.
I'll just get the committee
and for the sake of those who are in the room,
just do quick introductions.
Um, on the vote left, uh, John Francisco Menez.
Aye. Greg From Kirsten. Carl v member.
Alright, thank you.
And thank you for those who've been patient.
We, uh, we can't get started
until question time is finished, which is why we, uh,
we need to be a bit flexible about, uh,
about starting and finishing times.
Alright, um, Mr. Rhodes, uh, you have 10 minutes
to speak to your petition.
Um, and if you would leave time for questions,
take your submission as read.
But, uh, if you could leave
time for questions, it'd be appreciated.
So, floor is yours.
Thank you very much. My story is about cow shock.
My story about cow shock colors started an airplane.
I read a virtual fencing article in the Kia Aura Magazine
and was horrified and disgusted.
Why on earth would they publicize such a gross thing
for every tourist to see what right have they got
to taint everyone's milk with cruelty, yuck,
Just like it is on the farm.
I am the one who has to fix this.
From then on, I read every article published about virtual
fencing and studied how the device worked
and how the cows, every movement was controlled.
Getting the cows in
and setting up breaks is the most enjoyable job on the farm.
Let the cows be cows
and don't try to make them behave like robots.
There are animals who have their own minds
and already know what to do and is what
and what is best for them.
Why mess with their heads?
How could they believe that shock collars would make the
grass grow better?
The grass growth is dependent on sunshine,
rainfall, soils and plants.
Feeding of cows is about feeding out.
When there's a grass shortage
and conserving feed when there is a surplus,
grass is allocated
and equal feed portions so that it has the right time
to grow before the cows come back.
There is no magic in it.
And all sorts of technology is available to measure grass
and position fence breaks.
The level of persuasion needed to get a farmer to sign up
to an expensive virtual fencing subscription is immense.
I can only imagine a huge cost of marketing
and welfare washing this product.
There is no independent advice for farmers
considering these collars.
At the end of the day, there is nothing to say
Who is in the pay of Holter.
USA culture Capitalists funding virtual
fencing are exploiting our cows and our industry.
They're locking farmers into an expensive subscription,
which is very difficult to get out of the runway.
Express train of network marketing is charging
through our farmers' lives and our cow's instincts.
It is fueled by billionaires money
and keeps on taking on passengers from every part
of the farming community
to faithfully propagate their stories
and sing their songs, which are far too good to be true.
The unbridled ambition to convince every human
and collar every cow in the country is overwhelming.
I can understand why a Norwegian company invented virtual
fencing to give indoor cows a chance to get some freedom
by going outside to graze where there are no fences.
Distinguished. Professor Temple Grandin told us over the
phone, taking out physical fencing to replace
with the virtual fencing is crazy.
Virtual fences should not be used to bring in cows
for milking or be used in small areas.
Deborah and I stopped
outside some shock collared cows on a wintering crop
and observed how they interacted
with their invisible fences.
Sadly, one of them was Stone Cold Dead.
We have driven past a local farm with collars
and seen one cow standing on her own outside
of virtual fence break.
But seemed kind of cool
that she had beaten the control system,
but also said that she'd have to go to the freezing works.
The latest advertising video on stuff news
features an experienced dairy couple
who have just got the collars.
He talked about he, how he could see his cows presumably
as dots on his cell phone screen starting to huddle together
because it was raining, very hard bearing
that this would result in a patch of damaged pasture.
He set the cows to move into a small new grass break.
Inevitably, they ate out the new break
and started to huddle together again.
He described repeating this process seven
times during the night.
You can only imagine how much more pasture damage all
that move moving and re huddling would've caused.
So he got to stay inside pushing buttons
so the cows could keep eating for him
and not be able to huddle together for warmth and comfort.
I put it to Matt Stone chair of the National Animal Welfare
Advisory Committee that shock collar did not allow normal
and instinctive behavior
or a positive mental experience for cows
as required by the act.
These are aspirational clauses.
The continuing use of battery hem cages
and pig farrowing crates shows
that these clauses are not enforceable
or effective in dealing with the intrusion
of cow chalk polys.
They promised an opinion piece on virtual fencing
to be published in March, 2024
and have remained concerned about the non adapting cows.
Andrew Hoard wrote to the committee in July, 2024
to instruct them not
to publish any opinion pieces on animal welfare.
This effectively shut the door on giving farmers
or the public any cautionary information on virtual fencing.
A code of practice for organic milk production used
to include, include the claws.
Electric shocks shall not be used
to co coerce movement in cows.
This was changed at halter's request to
electric prodders are prohibited.
You would think that organic milk production would be
as natural as possible and in line with what mother nature
or God intended.
The tough thing for me in this campaign is the apathy
of the regulators who fail
to see the cruelty being inflicted on our beloved cows,
which are a TGA or national treasure.
I've spent many hours marketing two petitions on social
media and have read thousands of comments from the public.
People who empathize with animals
quickly reject the technology as been outrageous and cruel,
or describe it as a dystopian horror story.
Those who defend the technology either faithfully
regurgitate the company's stories or gang up to bully
and belittle me using names like Tim Hatton.
My hope is that this select committee does agree
to an inquiry into the public, consumer
and market perceptions of virtual fencing,
shock collars on our dairy cans.
That's you guys that would be fantastic
to run a public survey, which explains
what virtual fencing is all about.
This could find out
how the public feel about all aspects of the technology.
Unfortunately, Fonterra never asked their farmers
how they felt about it.
All risk to their reputation.
The claim of growing more grass could be verified
by requesting farm insights reports from farmers
with virtual fencing compared with other farmers
media articles which appear to be news could be examined
to establish if they are in fact advertising
Subscription lease contracts could be disclosed to find out
what the incentives are
to promote the colors to other farmers.
And any gag laws is industry organizations
and consultants could also be asked to
disclose their vested interests.
How the introduction of animal control
technology breaks the relationship between caregiving,
dairy farm workers and cows could be investigated.
The dairy industry is challenged to retain workers on farm.
A culture of control
and surveillance would make matters worse.
The way farmers treat their cows reflects
how they treat their people.
Perhaps Holter USA could sell their own farmers' milk
or just take the controls off their collars.
The best economic solution is
to milk free next cows once a day
during daylight hours as I do.
Thank you. Any questions?
Yep. Alright. Thank you Mr. Rhodes. Uh, Mr. Fleming.
Um, thanks Tim. Have you engaged, um, with Holter?
I just, um, the reason my question is just,
and I have a quite a detailed look at their,
at their product, and with all due respect, my understanding
of the way the product works
and their whole approach to farming is just very different
to what different the characterizations
that you've given in both your written and oral submission.
So I just wondering, have you, are you engaging
with the actual full product firsthand
experience and interaction?
Or is it more on a strawman basis?
Um, yeah, what's happened is, um, my wife's been
to directly engaged with halter staff at the,
um, field days event.
So that's the only direct engagement that I've made.
But I've, I've had an engagement with the cows and paddocks
and the, um, the farmer who, um, is a local farmer
and, um, had a lock through all of their videos
and all the publications and the Australian publication
and Megan Verde's publication
and how the, how the, um, collars work
and who owns the company and, um, everything else.
I do understand it. I'm not
just making it up, put it that way.
Uh, Mr. Hernandez,
Uh, thank you chair. And,
um, you've sort of alluded to it in your, um,
submission, but I just wanted, uh, it explicitly confirmed,
uh, in your view, the kind of status quo,
the physical restraints is, uh,
and the physical fencing is better than the virtual fencing.
Yes. I I think that, um, the existing system with the,
with, um, brake fences and,
and permanent fencing is far better
because the cows come into the paddock
and they, um, have a look around,
check out their boundaries, and then they settle down
because they know where their boundaries are
and being hurt animals, they feel safe, um,
within visible known boundaries.
Um, in our case, we mostly use permanent fencing
and don't use break fencing very much.
Um, give the cows a whole paddock
or two paddocks, whichever.
But, um, they do remember where the boundaries are
and they, um, they know when they come into the shed
that they're on their way to new grass.
So they, um, come in, they're willing to come in, they know
how to cross the road and they know about cows.
They know how to walk to the shed.
Um, so they're intelligent creatures
and they're creatures of habit
and they're willing participants in the
dairy farming process.
They're not coerced to do anything.
Thank you. Um, Shiro, I'm, uh, showing my age,
but I grew up on a dairy farm
where we had barbed wire fences
Yes. And
Which were quite big fields.
And then when we went to breaking with,
there was quite some, quite discussion when we
went to electric fencing.
Yeah. Um, and breaking up the size that actually we were,
was crawler to do that
'cause we were preventing the roaming ability of the cattle.
I remember quite remember those discussions at the time.
Are we at the same sort of technology change here that, uh,
in a few years time this will be probably become the norm,
as has electorate fencing?
Um, I don't believe it would become the norm.
Um, electric fencing can be seen
and it can be sensed by cows.
Um, it's probably the best way to think of it as it's,
it's a boundary visible boundary, which is a hazard as well.
So in the natural world, there's hazards
and there's, um, visible boundaries.
Um, so the cows basically get
a break, get the same boundaries,
but all of the time that they're in a paddock,
which is normally a day in our case.
Um, yeah.
So yeah, cows, cows do have a, a way of sensing, um,
induced current through a wire with their whiskers.
So you can see them, um, putting their
muzzle towards a a, a normal fence.
Alright, any other questions or? No?
Uh, thank you very much. Uh, very, very good discussion.
Spoke well to, uh, to your submission and beyond.
So thank you very much. Uh, well we, now we have, um,
submitters, um, you're welcome
to remain online, uh, for them.
So, um, Holter, um,
we have representatives from Holter here.
Um, Mr. De, Mr. De,
I actually, I was a bit worried.
You actually bring a cow in there.
They're gonna put a collar on you.
Alright, gentlemen. Um, 10 minutes.
Um, you've, I think we've gone, everyone's gone
through your submission, but, uh, speak to it
and prefer release all the questions. Thank
You. So, hi,
I'm Charlie and this is Steve. We're from Holter.
Uh, I've got a short statement to share
and then we'll happily, uh, field questions.
Thank you for having us today.
Holter is the world's largest virtual fencing provider.
We have safely trained over a quarter of a million animals.
We have over 500 customers throughout New Zealand,
Australia, and the us.
Our customers use Holter to run more productive
and more sustainable farms.
Our customers grow and harvest more grass.
They monitor the health and fertility status
of their dairy cows.
They save so much time by not having to fence
and herd their animals,
and they reinvest that time into high value tasks like
animal health management.
They care for their environment better than before.
And importantly, they care for their animals better than
with conventional methods of stock management.
Our customers repeatedly say how calm content
and healthy their cows are with halter
halter's system includes, uh, both virtual fencing
and virtual herding, uh, functions.
Virtual fencing allows farmers
to contain animals within an area,
and virtual herding allows farmers to dive cattle
to a new location without conventional methods like quad
bikes and dogs that we know, uh,
can be stressful for animals.
A benefit of Holter is that cows walk at their own pace,
and so they experience less lameness, which is leg
or foot pain because they're not being pushed from behind
by quad bikes or dogs.
Holter monitors the behavior of each animal
and can alert farmers to dairy cows showing early signs
of poor health that allows those farmers to then intervene
and treat those animals earlier than usual.
Holter has the deepest data set
of cow behavior in the world, which is used
to inform our r and d.
At the core of the Holter system is a rigorous set
of safeguards to protect animal welfare.
For example, if an animal fails to respond to the cues,
the system automatically disables
and will reactivate only if, uh,
the safeguard criteria is met.
Holter guides cows around farm using sound and vibration.
A low energy electric pulse is also used during training
or to reinforce those cues if cows choose to ignore them.
That is hundred times weaker than the from an
Cows are intelligent and quickly learn the
Holter system within a week.
And once trained, a typical cow is guided
around every day using sound and vibration,
and they experience those cues for only 1.6 minutes per day.
So for over 99% of the day,
the collar is just monitoring the animal.
Vastly, the science is clear.
The Tasmanian Institute
of Agriculture has carried out the world's most
comprehensive research project ever conducted into this
technology by independently researching Holter.
And their research findings show
that cows do have a strong understanding
of the Holter guidance cues.
And there's no increase in stress of Holter cues, uh, sorry,
Holter cows compared to cows managed
with conventional methods like electric fencing.
Thank you.
Alright, Fleming. Um, thank you very much.
Um, Jay, that, um, you've already answered the question I
was gonna ask around the level of the electric shock
that obviously is the, uh, major, um, area of concern.
You heard it from the, from the, um, from Tim
and I imagine probably it could come up in some
of the other submitters that certainly does
in some of the written submissions.
Do you have anything more to, to, to speak to that?
'cause I mean, that is the major point of conjuncture.
Sure. Yeah. So, uh, electric fence is, uh, one
of New Zealand's best inventions
and obviously used on most farms in
New Zealand and all throughout the world.
The design of that system
to contain animals actually uses excess electric energy
to contain an individual animal.
It's more designed to contain a group of animals
and to get the current around a farm
without it shorting out.
Yeah. So you're using excess electricity.
With Holter, we've gone the other way.
We've innovated to find the weakest level
of electricity needed.
Uh, in fact, any weaker and the cows just ignore the pulse.
That's how weak it is.
That's really good for the cows and for the farmer
because it means the cows are really confident
with the system and can graze right up
to the virtual boundary.
Okay. Um, can I ask a more, um, the, just, um,
anticipating, uh, I think it was inferred
and one of the written submissions
that might have been in terms, the Tasmanian study was
funded by halter. Is that correct?
Yes. So, uh, we saw a gap in the research, uh, um,
whilst we've got abundant, um, real world evidence of
a quarter of a million animals that are safe and healthy
and calm with, with all these customers,
there was a gap in the research.
Yeah. And as the category leader, we took it upon ourselves
to, to really, uh, have halter be independently researched
by the Tasmanian Institute, who, uh,
have a world leading position of
researching this very subject,
having previously researched other products.
Okay. At the same time, you can appreciate that,
that would, um, invite some
potential skepticism about the rigor
Of the findings given where the funding was coming from.
I mean, I'm not saying not saying criticism,
but you can understand why I, I think, uh, I think we need
to remember just the, um, academic integrity
of these research institutions
and the professional reputation of these, uh,
world leading researchers.
Thank you.
Thanks Chair. Um, and thanks for that presentation and,
and for taking us and those listening through.
Um, just wanted to dig a little bit more into the animal
health management component.
You know, sort of as you talk
and as you've shared in the past about Holter, the context
of the watch that we wear
or whatever to help us understand our own health statistics.
Can you tell us a little bit more about some
of the benefits you're seeing around, um, animal welfare
and health management from the data
that farmers are able to protect you?
Sure. So, uh, on a regular farm, the average ratio
of a farm worker to cows is probably around 200 plus.
So you're lucky if that farm worker captures a sick cow,
often they will go days without being caught, uh,
and detected by that farmer.
With Holter, we have, you know, continuous minute by minute,
um, monitoring of the health of that animal.
So we are measuring, uh, their grazing, their rumination,
their rest, their activity, their location,
and we quickly ascertain
that animal's individual baseline or normal.
And we compare that to the mob's baseline.
So as soon as their behavior deviates from their individual
baseline or the mob that might be mastitis,
that could be lameness, that could be milk fever, um,
their grazings gonna drop right off,
their ruminations gonna drop right off.
So we can pick up very subtle changes in their behavior
that would be naked to the human eye
and then can alert the farmer to go and take action.
So in the last year, we've alluded to 260,000 animals
of health alerts allowing those farmers to intervene sooner.
That's the health alerts part.
Secondly, as I said,
because animals aren't being pushed from behind with Holter,
they walk at their own pace.
Lameness is dropping right off.
There are fewer foot and leg injuries.
And lastly, because at the core of Holter for farmers,
the value is they can actually grow and harvest small grass.
They're able to, um, allocate feed more precisely.
It means cows are able
to meet their nutritional needs more consistently
with Holter, so they're in better body condition score.
Thanks. And cheer on a slightly different subject
around engagement with farmers.
Uh, there's some pretty direct commentary around the sort
of approach you've had, uh, to engaging
and onboarding farmers.
Um, within my electric, I've got a number of farmers
who are using the product.
I know a number of farmers who have engaged
and chosen not to for various reasons of where they're at.
Um, but haven't had any concerns raised, um,
as, as the local mp, I suppose, about that sort of process
or, you know, it's been just a, to me seems
as though a legitimate, legitimate business decision
that I've been making going through the process.
But have you had any concerns raised about the approach
that you've taken to try and get farmers on board
or, uh, what they call it buyer?
Um, yes. Sorry. Brain's not working by, you know,
Remorse. Thank You. Yeah.
Uh, so, um, this is one of our deepest, uh, expertise
training animals that's really, you know,
what we've specialized at.
Uh, and so it takes a week to train these animals.
After a week, the cows can be, um,
guided around with Holter.
So that onboarding
and training experience, um, we've gone to a,
call it a very robust
and rigorous training program for the farmers.
So we have very clear instructions on, uh, how to, how
to train those animals.
And, uh, for key parts of that, the farmer is present
and there's continuous monitoring by halter
of the training data.
And on top of that, there's, uh, you know, um,
24 7 support from our team as well. Um,
And, and just add to that,
'cause I don't think Charlie had the context of, um, the,
the previous, um, speaker, um, now our, our process
to engage with farmers to want to, um,
learn more about halter is just your normal process
where you, um, visit a farmer on farm, ask
what the challenges they have, what they're trying to do
with their business, um, what's important to them.
And, uh, we walk them through a normal process
that you would see of any typical product, uh,
from a business development perspective.
Yeah. And final, um,
and if I want to exit, if I've decided that
for my farm this is an appropriate
Yep. Walk through
That we, um, standard terms, uh, they're,
they're 24 months, um, farmers can exit our product
after their contract if they like.
And, um, we're certainly happy to have a discussion, um,
before that if, if,
if something's not right for them. Yeah.
Thank you. Um, just a couple
of other behavioral modification for cows, um, more in the
shed like kickers
and maybe, um, emptying their bowels
if this product could be used for
that behavior modification too, couldn't it?
And this is a question I'll ask subsequent submitters.
If that were to be the case, would that be, would you
as Holter be considering that to be outside the
recommended use of the product?
Yeah, I mean the, the success of a farmer's happy
and healthy cows
No, I'm being specific, is
that if you found out it's been used say in the shed
as a behavioral modification tool to prevent,
say I'm just using kicking Oh.
To prevent it So
that the Holter system actually fully disables within, uh,
a dis a certain distance from the shed
and in the shed, it's totally disabled because
because cows, they're in such close proximity,
obviously in the shed waiting to be milked,
the system doesn't operate in there.
So it couldn't be used No, no. Within, within the, no,
For example, 50 to 80 meters away from the cow shed.
Um, the, the collars, uh, are just monitoring, um, health.
They don't, um, they don't
provide any Could that be changed?
Uh, i, I don't think we would have any desire to do that.
No.
And the, the, and the farmer can't do, can't do that.
I mean the, the technology itself's all locked
from hq, correct?
Yeah. So the farmer has no control over the queues. Yes.
The farmer obviously chooses where to the destination
for the animals to move to,
but the actual guidance cues are based on the location
and the behavior of the animal. Yeah.
Yeah. Alright, Mr. Hernandez, finally
Thank you Chair.
Um, would you agree with, uh,
S-P-S-S-P-C-A submission where they call to quote,
establish comprehensive regulations
and minimum standards for farming technologies,
including virtual fencing and earning technologies?
So, uh, the, uh, technology like this already,
um, I, I guess there's the DEREK code of, of conduct
that already exists and there is a, uh,
this technology's already obviously legal in the current
version and in the draft code, um, we have engaged with NPI
and NAAC around that draft.
And given the abundant evidence of the health benefits
of this technology, we commend it should actually be, uh,
um, designated as best practice farming.
Um, so, so, uh,
farmers using this technology already have a duty of care
to, um, look
after their animals, um, regardless of what type
of technology they think.
So we would say there's already sufficient strong, um,
legal standards
and duties that farmers need
to meet under the Animal Welfare Act
and the dairy code of conduct.
You don't feel that, uh, more specific, uh,
or additional regulation is needed
that it's already no covered under your existing practice?
No.
I just, finally, just going back to my original question,
could a farmer request that it be able
to be used within the shared situation?
Any farmer could request that, but we cannot do that.
So that's just not, not an option.
Okay. Thank you. Um, One,
One real quick. One,
I was just interested your response to Tim's, um, um,
story of interaction with the, with the neighbor,
I think it was his neighbor, um, with the cows
during the night being moved multiple times
And not being able to huddle for warmth.
Um, oh, I, I think in those kind of harsh conditions,
you actually want to protect the pasture
and make sure the animals are on the best, um,
ground possible soil possible.
So by, um, uh, asking the girls to,
or offering fresh grass throughout a pretty, uh,
wet stormy night is actually more beneficial for the,
for the girls to, to have some fresh grass and,
and a good place to stand.
So it actually protects paddock and
House. Okay.
Yeah. Awesome. Okay. There's, there's actually many times
customers will say, Hey, middle of the night,
awful weather rolled through, uh, two in the morning
with normal farming, I probably would've just let that slide
and maybe the pasture's ruined or the cows are exposed.
But with Holter, I can actually look
after both the cows and the pasture.
Right. And, and not actually leave my bed. Yeah.
Okay. Cool. Thank you. Alright, thank you.
Um, I think we, uh, range
of questions would indicate there's quite a bit of interest,
uh, on that, so thank you very much.
Thank you. Um, we've got NPI here.
Good afternoon. Afternoon, Caroline.
Is it Caroline guy? That's
Right. Uh, thank you for
inviting me to speak with you today
to NPIs submission.
Um, so I'm Karen Guy, I'm the director of Animal Health
and Welfare and, uh, agriculture
and Investment services at
the Ministry of Primary Industries.
Uh, I also have with me,
Make sure our regional submitter give him the opportunity
to get back into
technology.
I'll never catch on.
Are you in a, do you in a position
to continue without your
colleagues? We'll, quite happy. Wait,
Yes, that's fine. Either
whatever you prefer to,
Or if, if you're happy to continue, we'll carry on.
Let you know when he joins. Yeah.
Okay. Carry on.
Um, so I'd just like to say, um, that, uh,
animal welfare matters.
It's important to animals, it's important to people,
and it's important to New Zealand.
The Animal Welfare Act is the overarching legislation
for the welfare of animals in New Zealand.
And it requires owners
and persons in charge of animals
to meet their physical health and behavioral needs.
And also to alleviate any unreasonable or unnecessary pain
or distress the animals may be experiencing Under their act.
There are regulations
and there's a regulation that requires
that wearable collars, such
as those used in virtual fencing technologies,
do not cause injury to animals
or prevent the animals from breathing, normally,
drinking or panting.
In addition, under the act, there are codes of welfare.
So the current 2018 code of welfare for dairy cattle
provides specific requirements for how owners
and persons in charge of dairy cattle must meet their
obligations under the act.
And this includes ensuring
that the dairy cattle are handled in ways
that minimize the risk of pain, injury or distress.
Now, the code of welfare
for dairy cattle is currently under review
and farm facilities, equipment
and technologies, including emerging technologies such
as virtual fencing were discussed
and were addressed in several proposed minimum standards.
When we look at the literature
around virtual fencing technologies, we see
that they can be used as an alternative to traditional
electric fencing and that they can provide benefits
for pasture allocation
and farmer wellbeing by reducing challenges associated
with access to labor and hours worked.
And in some cases labor costs.
Farmers have also noted that remote monitoring,
as has been discussed here today, allows them to identify
and quickly manage issues.
And that can include attending to isolated or sick animals
or escaped animals.
Virtual fencing systems
and their associated technologies also have their potential
to improve pasture and cattle management on farm,
for example, by assisting farmers
to meet fresh water regulations
and support the improvement of environmental outcomes,
for example, by reducing, uh, stock access to waterways
or improved winter grazing management.
Also, we've talked about the wearable devices can have, um,
data that's sent back to the farmers that allow the farmer
to, uh, detect changes in behavior
that may indicate when the animal is on heat is sick,
is lame, or is carving, all
of which can help them understand, uh,
better the animal care and and management.
When we surveyed a number of farmers, they noted
that virtual fencing is not a substitute
for skilled stockmanship,
but can be used to supplement animal husbandry on farm.
And it's important to emphasize that good stockmanship
with a good understanding of animal behavior
minimizes handling stress and improves animal welfare.
And in the code of welfare, this is underscored
and farmers must meet requirements for stockmanship.
Physical electric fences
and virtual fences both use electricity
to manage cattle behavior.
And in the process, cattle must learn to avoid an aversive
electrical stimulus by reacting to cues which may be
visualy or vibration.
A correct learned response to
that visual fencing is achieved when the animal reacts
appropriately to the initial auditory queue
and that it stops or turns away from the virtual boundary
and so avoids the electric stimulus.
Studies have shown that cattle can learn to respond
to this auditory queue,
however, individuals learn at different rates
and those slower to learn
or those that cannot learn may experience a welfare cost
with more electrical stimuli received.
This is likely to result in a negative welfare state for
that animal, including by being unable to predict
and control exposure to the electrical stimulus
by their own actions.
So we're individual animals are not suited
to such management or cannot learn to use the system.
They should be provided with alternative management
to ensure their welfare
and evidence suggests
that individual differences in personality
and herd structure should be considered when selecting
animals for virtual fencing,
there are no really long-term studies
that assess the effects
of virtual fencing and cattle welfare.
However, studies of three
to five month duration have shown no impact on the activity
or stress response of cattle when using virtual fencing
indicating no impact on welfare.
Welfare, there is no approval pathway
for agricultural technologies.
However, those that meet the requirements
of the act are acceptable for use.
And there is no evidence to suggest
that virtual fencing systems generically do not meet the
requirements of the ACT regulations or codes of welfare.
However, agritech companies that develop, manufacture,
operate and sell virtual fencing technologies should ensure
that their products have been well tested to make sure
that they do not cause unreasonable or unnecessary pain
or distress to animals.
Alright, thank you very much.
Um, so you go first something I just wanna pick up on
that last, um, comment you made about, uh, approval pathways
for agricultural technologies.
Is there, um, undertone behind that, that you think
that there should be some form of pathway
or you're quite comfortable with the,
essentially the way it occurs, the code of practice
and their market working against that?
Yeah, I mean, at the moment, the way the obligation is on,
um, those that are using, um, the technologies with animals
to ensure that they're not causing unnecessary pain
or distress or are necessarily impeding the other behavioral
or, uh, health needs.
Um, so I think that does work.
Um, and in terms of, um, a system, we do have regulations
that sort of put some boundaries around that to say that,
you know, that they can't, uh, cause any, um, ill effects
to the animal's neck, et cetera.
But, um, uh, there's no, uh, sort
of pre-approval process like there might be
for medicines, for example,
Supplementary chair.
And have you, uh,
or are you aware of any significant concerns
that have been raised through the sort of monitoring
or engagement, um, that you or your colleagues do?
So, um, and from a compliance perspective, um, we, uh,
have had, uh, just a few inquiries.
Um, so the first one was, uh,
just finding my notes there.
Yeah. Do you want to talk to that? Yep.
Um, so I guess it's outside of the, the,
the petition type work,
but, uh, as far as monitoring compliance across the,
the board, our system shows
that there's been one complaint in 2023.
Um, animal welfare inspectors investigated it, um,
inspected the farm and it was unsubstantiated,
so there were no animal welfare concerns.
And we also had a, um, an inquiry.
So, um, a member of the public asking us for a bit
of information about virtual fencing.
So they're the only two across our
systems over the last couple of years. So there's
Been no substantiated complaints across the last two years
In the NPI system. Correct.
Thanks, chief. Um, yeah, th thank you very much.
The, uh, petition is obviously asking for an inquiry.
Um, two other things that this committee can include.
Um, one is, um, that, uh, that, um,
there be some potentially some, some, some changes
of guidelines, uh, or policy statements or, and
or, um, imagine, um, calling for further research.
Would you, um, what are your thoughts on those three,
three options, if, if any of them at all?
Um, well, obviously over to the committee, um, uh,
in terms of, uh, research, you know,
there's always possibilities to, to conduct further research
and, and in welfare there's a lot
of different priorities for research.
So we do need to weigh up where the best use
of research money goes to, um, in terms of, uh,
further requirements.
Um, the, the code is currently, uh, in the process and,
and, uh, of being reviewed
and is quite late in that process.
And there is some additional requirements, uh, looking
to be put into their, um, to make sure that, for example,
individual, uh, animals that are unable to, uh, adapt, uh,
are not repeatedly, um, exposed to, uh,
vi fencing systems. Okay,
Thank you.
W was the, uh, ministry's experience, would you expect
that if there were issues you'd be hearing about it, if,
you know, if there were comp, you know, sufficiently
I suppose saturation, that, that you, if there were,
had been issues arising, you'd hear about them?
Certainly. Um, I, I would expect that both from the public
and from, um, you know, all our other sort of, uh, sources
that, that call our center
or email us through with sort of complaints or concerns.
And we've, we've only, as I said, we've only had that one.
Alright. Alright. Thank you very much.
Um, New Zealand Veterinary Association are, uh, coming,
both coming in via Zoom, is that right?
Afternoon. Good afternoon, Mr. Canon.
The, uh, now you've got a colleague,
have you Mr. Bryant, is that right?
I do have Mr. Kevin Bryant
and Bryce Todd as well joining in.
Alright. Oh, good.
Looks like the, uh, starting to appear
before us, so 10 minutes now.
Take your submission as read, look forward
to hearing from you, and hopefully time
for questions. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much, uh, for having us.
And I'll, I'll just make a short statement then I'd like
to hand over to Kyle and,
and Bryce who are experienced practitioners, uh,
in this field, uh, to,
and we thought it would be helpful for the committee to,
to share some of their practical experiences of dealing
with this technology on farm with farmers,
though at stewards of Animal health
and welfare, the New Zealand Veterinary Association
upholds the highest standards of animal welfare
while promoting efficiency, productivity,
and environmental sustainability in the agricultural sector.
NZBA supports the recommendations outlined in the
independent report by Fisher Airtel
and the proposed minimum standards by naac.
These standards emphasize the need for humane,
well constructed and responsibly managed technologies.
Virtual fencing technology presents a promising advancement
for dairy and beef farming in New Zealand,
offering significant benefits in terms of flexibility,
pasture management, and environmental sustainability.
And I'd just like to refresh the committee as to our,
our recommendations we had three is that
we do believe there needs to be regulations
and minimum standards for animal wearable technology.
And this will provide users in the public with confidence
that the technologies of both reliable and ethical.
We recommend the need
for further research on virtual fencing so
that we can understand the long-term impacts.
And we believe there needs
to be comparative research on containment systems so
that looking at the effectiveness
and welfare impacts of all those systems.
So I'd like to now just hand over to Kyle and,
and Bryce to actually, uh, share some of their experiences.
Yeah, thanks Kevin. Um, yeah, so our membership has, um,
over a thousand, uh, dairy veterinarian members
and this represents, um, over 95%
of practicing clinical dairy vets in New Zealand.
Um, yeah, and like Kevin said, our umbrella
or kind of our wheelhouse is really maintaining
and improving cow health, welfare and wellbeing.
Um, and as you've read our submission there,
we really do see that, um, those three things, health,
welfare and wellbeing of ca cows in New Zealand, uh,
improved, um, with virtual fencing technology
and specifically Holter, um, as the market leader.
So yeah, I just wanted to create a bit of, um, a bit
of background, uh, for you, um, with regard to dairy vets.
So we, we are in the industry
because we, we love the dairy industry, right?
We like love the people, we love working, um, outdoors,
we love the land, but like most importantly,
we love the cows.
It's a, you can't be a dairy vet, um,
veterinarian if you don't love cows.
So they're really enjoyable animals
and cool animals to work with.
So any kind of technology, any kind of management practice
that negatively impacts the welfare
or wellbeing of cows,
we would've heard about it out of our membership.
Um, you have dairy vets banging on the door of NPI,
like we just heard, just not happening.
Um, they'd be banging on the door of DCV, right?
We hear things coming at us.
If some dairy vets don't like something to do with welfare
of cows, we hear about it.
We're just not seeing that currently.
Um, we're actually seeing the opposite, right?
We're seeing like lots of improvement in welfare outcomes.
Um, the second part of it is we are quite a small community,
um, of dairy vets in practice.
Um, we've got a small network, so even talking
with other dairy veterinarians, um, working who work closely
with the virtual technology like myself, like Bryce, um, uh,
experienced dairy vets,
we just don't hear any negative feedback, um, specifically
around the welfare of cows, um,
that interact with this technology.
Um, and we only hear about the positives, right?
So improvements in specific, um, cow health outcomes
or wellbeing outcomes, um, once we have access to that data
and analyze that data with the farmer.
Um, so you, in conclusion, like Kevin said, um, the NDCV,
we can see huge benefits in virtual fencing.
Um, technology. We don't currently see any evidence
of any immediate welfare issues, um, related
to Holter raised by our membership.
Um, and yeah, finally, yeah, we would like
to see safeguards in place
or oversight of, um, technology on farm.
Um, the technology on farm space overall, to be honest,
but we've, we've touched on that a little bit, um, with
that previous NP with Karen speaking from NPI, um, just
that regulation of, um, technology on farm.
I wouldn't like to see Holter being used
as a martyr specifically for that, but yeah.
Um, that's what I gotta say. So yeah, happy
to receive questions or, um,
or heckles if you wish, I guess.
Alright, any questions?
Uh, yeah, sure. Yeah, thank you.
I, um, so Kyle, Kevin, maybe we'll just, um, I was gonna
ask you, Kevin, to speak further to your, um, call
for more research, but then I was gonna ask you, Kyle about,
um, just to, uh, elaborate more about the,
where you just finished there.
So maybe it's more efficient to, to start with you Kyle,
just to, if you don't mind, I just, the sense
that you were sort of wrapping up there,
so leave time questions.
Do you mind speaking a little
bit further to where you just finished?
Yeah, so you, the, um, yeah, we're talking about this,
the whole technology on farm space, right?
So like anything that touches a cow, um, there's, there's,
there's not much in, in, there's, there's the,
there's the welfare act, um,
but there's not much in between that
and me coming out tomorrow
and creating something that touches a cow
or interacts with a cow or a piece
of technology that interacts with a cow.
Um, and that's the gap that we're, that we would like
to see something as something in that space.
Right? Does that make sense?
Yeah, yeah, it does. Yep. Thank you. Yeah.
Um, in recent submissions we've had, um,
we've had submissions that, um, vets, a lot
of the vets require value added products
to basically remain financially, um, sustainable
vets wouldn't be selling this stuff.
They wouldn't be selling these systems,
they wouldn't be being sold through veterinary practices.
N no. So we are currently not selling ter
through veterinary clinics at all. No.
Yeah. Can I come back then to, um, Kevin,
you called for more research.
Can I just get your thoughts more about where, where
that might come from and then whether you have any,
any thoughts on, uh, the Tasmanian research and
or, uh, whether we're related to that, whether,
whether your sense is that that research is,
is drawn into question at all because it's funded by.
Yeah, so I, I better, I better, uh, own up
to the fact I'm not a veterinarian.
Yeah. Um, firstly, um,
and I think the, the, the whole issue
with the whole agritech sector really is, uh,
it's moving pretty fast.
And so what, uh, to, to Kyle's point about ensuring
that interactions with animals and,
and specifically cows are positive, uh, it's important
that research has been done to, uh,
back up the efficacy of these products.
And, uh, we, I, we have no problems with this, uh, research
that's been done in Tasmania.
Um, we see no conflict there
and it's possibly about the, the most comprehensive research
that's been done, but there is no long term, uh,
longitudinal research, uh, be done
because the technology's so new.
So that's what we're ad advocating for.
There's an ongoing, um, research
to actually monitor the impacts, uh, over time.
Right. Thank you.
I just want, I see it's being used about 200,000 cows.
Just someone, what's the dairy herd number in New Zealand?
What, what sort of proportion is that?
About 5%. Five 5% of New
Zealand's herd, 5% are herd
and mostly in, in any part of the country in particular?
Um, New Zealand wide.
Alright. So does that just 2000 just in New Zealand?
So, uh, 200 in New Zealand, two 50 globally.
Oh, so you got another 50,000 Tasmania in the us. Yeah.
Alright. Okay, gentlemen.
Looks like, uh, again, a lot of our questions are
by the time we get to our third
or fourth submitters, a lot of our questions have been
exhausted, so thanks very much.
Thanks. Thank you for your time.
And, uh, SBCA coming in by
and just for our next submitters on the next topic,
we're just running a little late.
The, the house was running. We didn't, couldn't start
until the, uh, question time had finished.
We were a bit late today. An interesting question time.
Alright. Thank you very much.
From SBCA, um, Dr. Vaughn, is it,
Um, so Now you take your submission as read
and, uh, 10 minutes, uh,
hopefully leaving time for questions.
Super. So I'm Dr. Allison Vaughn.
I am a scientific officer with SPCA
and we would like to thank the committee
for the opportunity to present.
Uh, I am an animal behavior and welfare research scientist
and my research background
before joining SPCA was actually exploring the learning
abilities of dairy cattle
and ways in which technology could be used in training
of cattle to improve welfare.
Um, although I did not explore the use
of electric shocks in my research, um,
I will take our submission as read,
but I just wanted to briefly highlight some
of the key points from our submission, um,
and points that may be pertinent to some
of the earlier ones, and then use the remainder of my time
to answer any questions the committee may have.
So SPCA supports this petition
and calls for an inquiry into virtual fencing technology,
but we would like to go further to recommend extending this
to include other animals where virtual fencing, uh,
systems are used or may be used.
So that includes dairy, beef, beef, cattle and sheep.
And that's because these animals are different from dairy
cattle as sheep is not a small cow, and their behavior
and potential impacts may be different.
So it seems a good opportunity ones to be done
to also include those species.
We've been watching this space very closely
and I would echo NZBA in considering
that there is a welfare gap in terms of the speed
of development of virtual fencing
and other technologies going faster than, uh,
robust research into long-term welfare impacts both positive
and negative keep up.
And it's quite important in terms
of making informed decisions
that we do understand the long-term impacts.
Um, as I said, both positive and negative.
I did wanna highlight that a lot
of the conversation today has been around the current use
of these devices and in particular the use of, um,
virtual fencing devices that Holter.
But we do consider it important to highlight that the use
and abilities of these devices is rapidly evolving
and it's also growing sector.
So we anticipate
that there will be additional products entering the market
in coming years and it's really important
that we're future focused.
So currently in New Zealand virtual fencing is closely
managed by the companies developing devices such as,
and they have, um, post management including selection
of customers and personalized training, 24 hour support,
data monitoring and refinement, which is excellent.
However, the broader commercial use this level
of oversight may become impractical.
Um, so we just need to be future focused, um,
around potential risks
and the welfare if we don't have
all those safeguards in place.
Uh, it's also important to note
that results from previous studies on specific virtual
vening technologies and safeguards in place
by companies such as halter cannot be directly extrapolated
to all other current future models of this technology
or other companies.
There's currently wide variation between products in terms
of their physical characteristics, um, such as weight design
and mechanisms, um, the size of them, the duration
of shocks, variation in, uh, cues, and also safety controls.
We support the comprehensive analysis conducted by Naac
in the evaluation report for the dairy cattle Code
of Welfare, and
that identified several potential animal welfare risks
as associated with virtual fencing technologies.
And that included potential impacts on animal behavior such
as lying and resting variations in learning rates
and potential infrastructure failures.
So we are concerned that the absence of regulation
for the development, uh, diversification application
of modern farming technologies, including virtual fencing,
may potentially put animal welfare at risk.
And, um, as was raised earlier, we do recommend
that specific regulations are introduced
for virtual fencing technologies.
And this can be practical
and um, not impede on what is currently done,
but these would be things like limits on the maximum shock
intensity and duration third party monitoring requirements,
uh, behavior based algorithms
and critical resource in animal management requirements.
So for example, this could be a tool, uh,
to ensure animals have water access, uh, shade and shelter
and physical, uh, boundary fencing.
Um, so with that I would like to hand over my time
to the committee, um,
and answer any questions that may come up.
Well, well, I have a question.
Are there any specific regulations around electric fences?
I think most of the current, um,
the current protections have been sort of covered in NPIs,
um, presentation, but there are in, uh,
the proposed minimum standards, uh,
some examples which we included in our submission.
So that's around farm facilities, equipment
and technologies must be designed, constructed, maintain,
and used in a manner that minimizes the likelihood
of distress, pain, or injury to animals.
Dairy cattle that do not adapt to new technologies must be
provided with alternative management person chart.
There's a few of them. Um, uh, the person or
or owner in charge must inspect dairy cattle at frequency
appropriate to the circumstances and class of dairy cattle
and take timely preventative and remedial action.
And that stock persons are trained
and competent in the operation
and maintenance of farm facilities, equipment
and technologies and understand
how encrypt operation may affect cattle and care.
And there's a few example indicators, um, for each of those.
Does that answer your question?
You didn't quite answer my question or maybe I missed it,
but there's no regulations around specifically
around electric fencing?
No, but electric fencing, you, you mean in terms
of traditional electric, fixed electric fencing?
Yeah, so there isn't currently,
but I do think that the technologies are quite different,
um, in terms of if we consider, um, the hierarchy of
how cattle learn in terms of learning cues.
So spatial is pretty important, visual is really important.
Um, auditory is much further down,
so I don't think we're comparing apples with oranges.
Um, I do think that it is easier
for dairy cattle potentially to learn
to avoid a fixed virtual, uh,
a fixed fence than a virtual fence.
Um, so yeah,
and I also do think that we don't use electric tape fencing
for moving cattle, so that would be another difference,
um, between the two.
Alright, thank you. Um, members questions? Yes.
Yeah. Um, thank you very much.
Um, Alison, I'd just be keen probably to push into
where Greg was asking there,
just when I reflect back on the previous two submissions
from, uh, the vet association NPI, I'm just struggling
to see why, um,
why the current framework, which as you've said is,
is being reviewed and is evolving, why that isn't sufficient
to take account of this new
technology if I'm missing something.
Yeah, so I would say that the, the current protections
and the proposed ones, um, aren't, uh, I don't think
that the potential welfare risks
that have been identified associated with virtual fencing
are, um, adequately captured there.
And so that's why the proposed, um, uh, restrict, uh,
requirements that both myself
and NZBA have talked about, um, seem a reasonable, um,
balance to ensure as this, these technologies rapidly evolve
that we have some guardrails in place
to safeguard the welfare of cattle.
Okay. Alright. So you're speaking, um, specifically, um,
to what, um, so was it Kyle
was calling, was Carl, wasn't it?
Yeah. What Carl was calling for.
Yeah. So we would like to see some guardrails in place
because as Kyle noted, um, this is, these are rapidly
evolving technologies and while Holter has got a lot
of safeguards in place, there's nothing currently in place
to ensure that other, um,
companies entering the market would have similar
guardrails to protect welfare.
Okay. If those kinds of, um,
changes were brought in, do you still think that a,
an inquiry would be just, would be, would be necessary?
That's a good question.
Um, I, I do think that it will be helpful, um,
to inform perhaps, um, those kind
of requirements and what they should be.
Okay. Can I ask, Would we learn much more
than what we've learned today?
Have you heard the, um, submission this today? Mm-Hmm.
Would Inquiry really expose
more than we've heard today?
I think an inquiry might delve a bit deeper.
This has been quite focused on dairy cattle, for example.
And as we noted, we, we are aware of, um, the, the use
of these technologies and the potential use
of these technologies were much broader spectrum.
But I do think the, um, it would be of value to identify,
uh, what requirements might be feasible
and what might be considered acceptable
to the New Zealand public.
Yeah. I've got, um, so one more question.
Do we have virtual fencing of sheep?
So what you, you mentioned in when you, when you, um,
you included the list of other animals.
Mm-Hmm. Did you say you say sheep?
Yeah. So virtual fencing is used in some areas, um,
and in some other countries, um,
for sheep and quite widely used.
And we can see with New Zealand's, um, high country farms,
how this might be, um, an appealing prospect.
Um, so it's important when we're considering these
technologies, um, that we also consider other species.
Wow. Is it with, with collar as well on the sheep? Mm-Hmm.
Ah, okay. Thank you.
Alright gentlemen, that's uh, well thank you very much.
Thank you. No other questions for on reflection
with any of our submitters.
Alright, thank you very much. Very interesting.
One of our, uh, say more, uh,
intriguing and interesting areas.
So we'll, uh, we'll report back on that. So thanks a lot.
Thank you. You're welcome to remain for our next, um,
next session, which is, uh, entru.
Um, and we are hearing from Thank you very much.
Thank you.
If anyone's, uh, speaking attorney Bel house,
the house is running like one hour fast,
One Hour's running, one hour fast. Yeah.
Alright, so we've got that in trust. Um, Mr.
Uh, Oliver, I take it, uh, and uh,
The chair of, uh, interest Denise Lee.
Oh right. Uh, we're very familiar with, um, Ms. Lee
and I'm sure she's familiar with our processes, so
Somewhat So who's leading off? Is it? Uh,
You? Uh, that'll,
that'll be me, chair ota.
Alright, thank you. Well, 10 minutes.
Um, I'm looking forward to hearing from you.
Thank you and good afternoon to everyone.
Um, appreciate your time, especially since it's so close
to parliament closing and you're heading home some
more closer than others.
Mr. O'Connor. Um, I am the chair of Entrust and Mr.
Robin Oliver are former deputy IRD Commissioner is there
with you in the room as an advisor to entrust
and he will address some of the written comments made
by officials to the committee.
Um, I and my fellow entrust trustees appreciate this
opportunity to present our support for the petition, calling
for a tax change to stop low income Auckland families from
continuing being overtaxed.
Members will have read our briefing note on the petition
seeking redress for the current overtax over taxation
of entrust distributions.
And so I'll just highlight a couple of points.
Entrust just a little background is the result of the 1993
electricity structural changes it owns on behalf
of 365,000 households in the old Auckland
Electric Power Board area, 75%
of the shares in the publicly listed company vector.
It also receives the vector dividend twice a year
and distributes that to beneficiaries
around September October each year.
This year the net cash distribution
after tax deducted was $350.
So this is a very important family income booster,
especially to low income families.
For them every cent counts.
Now the petition highlights that over taxation
of low income families under current tax law as it operates,
it seeks redress by way of a change to the Income Tax Act.
Entrust is currently taxed under the rules designed
to tax the income of small family trusts.
This means that the Victor Dividend entrust receives has
33% withholding tax deducted.
Now entrust has to pay this to IRD
and it reduces the net cash income of beneficiaries
given that most are on a tax rate, less than 33%.
The tax rules Entru is under maybe fine for family trust
with only a few beneficiaries,
but they do not work for entrust
with its 365,000 beneficiaries.
The result is that low income families are overtaxed.
Now the government gets full tax revenue,
but at a material cost, low income families.
As noted for these families, every cent count,
the amount of overtaxation depends on the individual
circumstances of each beneficiary
and the amount in the makeup of the entrust distribution.
Overall, based on a detailed survey undertaken
by inland revenue, low income families are overtaxed
by $90 each a year.
For some $90 might not sound like a lot,
but again, for these people, every cent counts.
It also quickly adds up.
Given 365,000 beneficiaries are involved based on
that same inland revenue survey.
Auckland is in total are overtaxed by some
$14 million a year.
The Overtaxation needs to be fixed,
and this petition seeks support for it.
So the proposed fix is
to replace the inappropriate family trust laws
that is now implying to us at entrust
and replace them with rules similar to those of Kiwi Saver.
Kiwi Saver is also designed for trust with a large number
of public members.
Just like our entrust, the proposal is
to have entrust taxed under the portfolio investment entity
or PI rules.
This would remove the current over taxation.
Now, there are technical details that Mr. Oliver
as a tax expert can answer if the committee so wishes.
That's definitely not my expertise.
Uh, entrust has discussed this idea at length
with inland revenue officials
and Inland Revenue has agreed
that the proposed PY rules would work.
The over taxation problem has been around for a long time.
In 2017, the then minister of revenue agreed
that over taxation should be fixed.
However, inland Revenue advised that it's new,
my IR system,
which we'd all know about would fix the problem,
but the new my IR system was introduced
and did not fix the problem.
So, subsequent ministers have followed IRD officials advice
and have not agreed to any fix.
It seems that treasury values the windfall revenue gain,
and I appreciate that any government values its tax revenue,
but this should not be at the cost
of overtaxing low income Auckland families.
So we are asking for support for this petition
to fix over taxation of the entrust dividend.
Thank you very much,
and I will now hand over to Robin Oliver for his comments
and answering questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I just want to focus,
as Denise had mentioned on the officials report to you,
and three points we want to respond on,
um, where we disagree.
Basically, first point, um, officials argue that
entrust is, does not within the policy of the pie rules,
as they say that pies are designed
for widely held savings vehicles.
Entrust is widely held, 360,000 people.
You can't get more widely held than that.
Um, it's a, it is an effective savings vehicle.
By that you mean it's not running a business.
It doesn't run the lines business, which is vector.
It is just a basically money for the Aucklands, uh,
in the future set aside earning income.
It's basically just state strengths investment.
It's got nothing to do with running a business.
The rule says that you cannot pay.
Rule says you cannot own own 20%.
That's a proxy for not running the business.
Entrust owns over 70%,
but it doesn't normally in business,
that would be a subsidiary, but it's not a subsidiary.
It's just a savings vehicle.
Second point, uh, uh, in the officials report, they, they,
uh, uh, suggests that entrust could work with officials
to pre-populate the my IR return.
So if, you know my IR sort of round about, uh, April,
may you get a pre-populated return on your my IR system, um,
within the next two months, you're supposed to confirm
that as correct.
If you don't confirm it by July, it's deemed
to be confirmed, and that's your
assessment and that's your return.
There's no interest stuff in that, and that's the problem.
But the problem is interest is remote
from the actual individual beneficiaries
because they are dealing with retailers.
There's no actual direct connection.
It does not have the ID numbers. It does not have the names.
Um, when we worked with ID uh,
for about two years working through
with the compliance people,
the admin people, can we make this work?
The conclusion after two years work was, no,
we could not get those numbers.
They need to pre-populate the two.
The final point mate of official said, well, if you
people could just go out, almost no one adjusts their,
their, their, their, uh, my IR
to officials say, well, you can do that.
I think you have in front of you
and distributed a copy of the distribution statement.
So if I just refer to that,
and that's what they would have to go into my, I, uh, my IR
and make an adjustment based upon this statement.
And the statement is, uh, 2 24, that's,
would you'd use this thing for your 24 25 return,
your next return back in April next year?
And the first thing you've gotta know is
that entrust is a trust when it doesn't look like a
trust to most people.
You know, they think of family trust.
This is 360,000 people.
It looks like a company or something like that, you know,
or can we say or something?
Um, it's, they didn't come out's a trust.
Then they look at the first line,
a non-taxable distribution tax paid trustee income, $21 97.
They have to know not to put that in the return
because that is trustee income
taxed at the trustee level if it's taxed at all.
So they could, should not put that in the return,
otherwise it'd be overtaxed.
Then they look at taxable distribution,
um, a dividend.
Now, your my AR turd has a box full
of trustee income.
Do not put it in that that would be wrong
and you would stuff up your return.
It has to go in dividends.
It has to go as a di vector dividend
because of the nature of trust rules.
So they've never owned any Victor
shares as far as they're concerned.
They're supposed to put into the tax return a would, uh,
income from a vector dividend, which they, from their point
of view, they never owed any Victor shares.
And they have to put, uh, the G gross amount of that,
which is $184 29.
Then if there's imputation credits,
there have been imputation credits
in the past, they have to put that in.
I'll be finished in, yeah, pretty short.
And then have put with withholding tax
and put that in the right column.
And then a problem,
because that's for the 2324 year,
you are filing your 24, 25 year.
You don't put any of those numbers in.
You only put the second lot in.
Then you have to go back
and reassess last year's return
because these are for different income years.
The first one is for the vector dividend in about April the
second is the vector dividend of September.
And the way the rules work, they're deemed to be derived
by you in those early appearance.
So you would have to readjust all your current returns
and give an explanation for it, and then go back
and readjust last year's return.
Otherwise you won't be paying enough tax.
And then you go through the process. This is not easy.
If I put this to a stage one university tax class
as a exam question, they would fail.
I mean, always said, yeah,
most would never be able to do it.
It's, it requires a lot of knowledge.
So result is
that very few people do the adjustments only those
who have accountants, if everybody did,
there's 360,000, 250,000 of them are over tax according
to IRD survey 2019.
I think, um,
there'll be at least 250,000 adjustments every year
and then readjusting the past years as well
as adjusting this year's IRD system would fall over.
It couldn't go with that many adjustments to return.
So basically in that really is relying upon over taxation.
If it, if you didn't get that over taxation,
the system would collapse.
So, um, Mr.
Chairman, that's the basis of response to those three items
by officials that, uh, um, it, it's, yeah, it's, it's the,
the prior rules are not designed for things like entrust.
While that the, um, uh, we, we could go back
and try to get the pre-populated returns,
well then you'd have all this other problem too,
of the ID systems would be that work.
But we've gone through that two years.
And the third thing is, yes, it is complicated
and thank you Mr.
Thanks, chair votes.
Um, thanks and it's, it's quite an interesting one.
Um, and I agree with your last comment.
Uh, yes, it's complicated.
Um, and appreciate the challenge that Denise described, uh,
and the value of additional money, uh, in the hands
of those that need it.
Clearly, uh, the government, uh, takes that perspective
with some of the tax relief
provided this year that all of that said to me, there seems
to be two challenges with what you're raising.
Um, one is that the pie issue,
on the one hand you're trying to say it's
those rules are designed for this sort of scenario.
But on the other hand, take your comment, uh,
this is very widely held
and you have no direct con
connection with the beneficiaries.
That's through the retailers.
'cause they, they don't actually hold shares as, you know,
and ENT trust it.
So it's unique.
And I wonder whether part of the problem is that, which is
that you're trying to put this into a set of rules
that are designed for, and,
and it needs a slightly different approach
to try and achieve the outcome.
So I suppose my first question there is, have I got my kid
around the challenge, uh, that, that you're, um, raising in,
in the right way?
And secondly, um, could you achieve
at least some benefit for your beneficiaries immediately
by taking your distribution statement
and designing it up with some of those instructions
much more clearly?
And then a sort of a part two of that would be
using your majority shareholder role in Vector
to align dividend payments
to a timetable that would work for you to distribute it in
distribution statements that would align with the tax year.
I'll answer the first,
at least the first question, which is technical.
You know, can I entrust do a little explanation guide
as to how to, you've heard me go through it.
I could, I would take about six,
seven pages, uh, to do that.
You know, these are,
these are not tax people I'm talking to.
Uh, they, they're not going to to read it.
It would also involve interest giving tax advice,
which would be, um, uh, commercially
and I think legally problematic.
Um, you to sit there and go out and give 'em tax advice.
So, uh, I don't, it is too complicated to try
to tell people who've never owned a Victor share
you for tax purposes.
You are deemed to have a dividend and,
and they're all in two different income years.
And then you, you've got to put it in this my i i box.
I mean, you know, I mean the whole,
my I system relies upon the fact that people ignore it
and just deem to confirm.
Yeah. Um, I guess they've got
other income and what have you.
On the other question, Denise, uh, terms
of Victor Denise, should it?
Yeah, thanks. So just make sure
that I've got the question right
and it was, um, can we align,
Could you Use timetable?
Yeah. Yeah.
Look, that, that's something that I,
I must say I don't have information on.
Um, but surely even that though, um,
member Bateman would be, um,
still more complicated than simply making us a pie entity.
Um, and recognizing how unique we are to such a large group
of Aucklands, um,
and, um, have parliament not have any problem
with us being akin to a Kiwi saver provider.
Um, so look, look,
what you are hearing today is a whole bunch of complicated,
um, and unnecessarily complicated process for people
to simply, and especially those on low incomes,
as I've mentioned before, to simply, um, to,
to not be overtaxed.
Um, a very small amount don't
because they use their accountant and many others.
250,000 I think is what you said, Robin, do.
So, um, we, we don't think that
IRDs arguments stack up
and we're asking for you to help us out.
Alright. And on that, we'll hear from IRD now
and then we're have an opportunity
to maybe have a discussion,
have a discussion with the two of them.
Great. Got, so invite, um, IRD now. Um,
Otherwise, otherwise I'm providing,
I'm sure, I'm sure we can, um,
rely on you all be at the table together.
Alright, thanks, uh, gentlemen and Mr.
Be interested to really, you've,
you've obviously had your submission
and you can speak to that and have some discussion.
Sure. I'm Paul Fulton. I'm
A principal policy advisor at Inland Revenue,
and you'll see my name on the bottom
of that submission there.
Beside me, I've got Barry Hollow,
who's also a principal policy advisor at Inland Revenue.
Uh, just like to, for start off, call off one of the lines
that's early in my submission
around sensitive revenue information.
Basically inland revenue is prohibited from talking about
sort of tax secret stuff, even relation to entrust,
even though Robin might be quite happy for me to say that.
Um, happy to talk in general terms
and to the extent I can say stuff, certainly happy to do
so much like I did in that submission.
Um, yeah, happy to take the submission is read
and answer some questions just to address a couple of points
that Robin mentioned.
Um, one is around the widely held nature of it.
So for a start, I guess the clue is in the name
for listed pies that every single listed pie at the moment
is listed on a stock exchange, um, for other types of pies.
So multi rate pies like a KiwiSaver fund
or various other things like that.
Those do have a widely held requirement.
There is an exception to widely held
for entities such as entrust, which have a large number of,
um, shareholders or trustees or settlers
or any of that sort of space.
Um, there's a specific schedule in the Income Tax Act, um,
it's called Schedule 29,
and that lists a number of exclusions to
that widely held requirement.
Lines, trusts of which entrust is an
example, is already on there.
Mm-Hmm. So that is not one of the challenges
with them becoming a trust, uh, becoming a pie.
But there are other, um, challenges there, um, in relation.
So pies have investment in tests, so who owns them
and investment out test, what does the Pie own?
Um, one of the other tests
that Robin mentioned is they're not allowed
to have more than 20%, um,
of an investment that they invest into.
He's already mentioned, um, entrust has 75%,
he's absolutely correct that the 20% is a proxy for control.
They're trying to put a pie in a similar position
to an individual who would be unlikely to have enough money
to own 2070 5% of a Lion's company.
Um, however, although that is a proxy,
there are no exceptions to that at the moment.
There's no list of companies that have more than 20%
but still don't have control.
If you extend that to one, then you get a lot
of other people coming in and go,
I've got some legal restriction on, I can't control.
I own more than 20% at the moment.
That doesn't meet the rules either.
So you're happy to pass over the questions,
Bates and then Mr. Fleming, Thank you.
Would it be possible to point about the explanation of how
to process this through my ir uh,
assuming there's also some opportunity for simplification,
uh, for IRD to put a guide into its guide section, uh,
for interest shareholders, given that the sort of complexity
or this, not, not even complexity,
but that the fact that it's not a pie, it's not a company,
it's not a share own, you know, it, it's a specific type of,
It's not a, an approach that we normally go down.
Barry may be able to answer this better than me, um,
but the generally we, we are happy
to provide general advice if you receive dividends,
put it in this box type thing to get down to the point
of if you've received a specific type
of income from a specific taxpayer and put that in that box.
That's not an approach that we normally do.
And I, and I think that adds a level of complexity to it
because people would have to get the interest statement
and go, oh, I've gotta look up this website
to work out what to do.
Whereas if you, you're sitting there
with the entrust statement, it says put box four and box A
and your my ir, it, it's all in the one place.
It saves an extra level of someone having to interact.
Feels like you guys should get together
and work out who's gonna put it on the state.
'cause Yeah. But
Flaming, yes. Um,
so the $14 million over taxation figure, is
that calculated on a single rate applied across the,
so this is actually, I'm looking at you guys,
but it's, it's really more for, um,
Denise, um, and or Robin.
Um, is that calculated on a single rate across the street in
30,000 beneficiaries?
Uh, it, it was based upon an IRD survey, uh, back in 2019.
Oh yeah, yeah. Just before covid.
Um, ID went round
and looked at, at, at a pretty good sample
of all the beneficiaries of interest, what they filed
and what at different income
levels, what they would've paid.
Yep. And that number came out, 70% overtaxed, 14 million,
uh, over taxation total.
And which applies to around,
around about 250,000 off the 330,000 beneficiaries.
Yeah, that seven. Yeah. So they, they,
that was a number overtaxed on that base of that survey.
Of course, incomes have changed a bit.
Tax rates have changed a bit,
but you know, it's still pretty good.
Okay. And so if the generic lines company was to, um,
be made a pie, uh, then it would be at,
well obviously per the, per the submission, 28%,
preferably 17%.
If it was 28%.
Um, just if you could remind,
it's been a while since I've, I've worked in this space.
Um, what logically getting up with 80%, well, sorry,
80,000 then if you done 50,000 of being overtaxed
and 33 cents, then 80,000 would be under taxed
and anything less than that.
Correct. What would be the mechanism then of the IRD
retrieving that level?
Or is it like a KiwiSaver where it, it, it, it doesn't get
And the interest proposal, you know,
the high income 39, 33 would be
untaxed saves KiwiSaver.
Yeah. Okay. So it is all right. Final,
I mean, that's the whole idea.
You can't make the system,
we say you can't make the system work.
Yeah. Through buying ir too
complicated, too many assessments.
If you have one rate
because everybody's on different rates, inevitably
you're gonna have some people overtax
and some people under taxed. Sure.
Yeah. So just putting aside the, the, the, the, the, um,
actual legal mechanism for a moment, essentially
what you are asking for is for a 28% rate
for everybody rather than, rather than
33% rate for everybody.
Correct. Okay.
So the net, what's the net the net impact of that?
The net, the net impact of that then isn't going
to be $14 million.
'cause the 14 million is, is, uh, assessed on the basis of,
of, of some people within that, many,
many beneficiaries in there actually
being at 17 and a half cents.
So, I mean, I don't know, pulling a number,
it might actually, the savings might only be $4 million.
Does that sound reasonable?
Uh, I think it would be 14 million, uh,
because that's the amount your, you know,
reduce the tax pay
and then you will have, you know, some people at
that higher income level.
But the number there would be minimal know.
So I think that fiscal costs be up to barrier. Treasury.
There's about 14 numbers. Yeah.
We haven't done a costing on this.
We've had a more principled objection to this.
Obviously if the minister chose to progress it, it would,
we would have to consider the fiscal.
Right. But we haven't done that yet.
Okay. I mean, I wonder if it's possible to do that
because I, that that would inform my thinking a lot, um,
in terms of any recommendation this committee makes on that.
'cause Yeah, I mean at first,
at first Blanc it sounds like we'd be going from right from
33 cents to 28 cents.
Is is in principle quite, quite different from, um, the idea
that if we were to, um, go down what, um,
Carl's encouraging, which is to re re-explore.
And I hear you saying, Robin, that you tried two years and,
and, and can't be done.
But, but that would be the route to ensure that
that people receive their full savings, not by 5%.
So from 33, 28 seems quite marginal.
Interesting to know what that's actually worth to it.
We could do the quick, it's really just
a few dollars then, isn't it? It's not $90.
Quite a few admin 250,000 returns adjustments a
year. Um, that mean,
So maybe if we could ask that question, how would
the IRD feel about, uh, a significant portion
of these beneficiaries choosing to um, go on my IRR?
Well, the ultimate goal goal, my IR was to, to not have to
make people do that.
So for example, if we get other investment income from a
company, they provide us with an IRD number
and we automatically go
and pre-populate that information to the return.
If we could do that, and in this example, um,
then you would get the washout completely right.
That's the difference, isn't it,
that having the ID number correct that then so what,
whatever, so if there is a solution is gonna have to,
someone's gonna have to be gatherers of the holders
of the ID numbers and, and, and trust.
And to that point, sorry, chair, is there anything
stopping in trust creating, uh, a relationship
with the retailers where it was to collect that data?
Even if it's a technology solution?
It's the name and the ID number. Yes.
And after, I think it was two years work, we could not get,
because all our, all entrust has is a list of names.
Famously they have fish
and chip shop that comes across as Mr.
Fish and, and, and Mr. Uh, chip shop.
Um, it's just a computer thing.
They don't have the same names, you know, and,
and linking with an ID number, the bank accounts are often
in a pursuit of that situation.
Just a odd bank account. It's just that nature.
They, they are just remote from the consumer.
Well, yeah. And presumably people's, a lot
of circumstances have changed.
What if someone dies? What happens there? Well,
That, that uh, uh, becomes an unclaimed money
after five years.
That's where these non-taxable distribution
comes off edge. Alright.
That's not like running a little bit of time.
We're running a bit behind the,
I we could probably go down that path too. So
People change your names, they get married, change
Joint names.
Yeah. Well look. Okay. Look, thank you.
And we may well be when we come discussion might well be,
we have some written questions here if we, once we sort
of absorb what we've got today.
So, so,
but uh, on, on a Thursday, we're sort of, um, still having
to, um, consume some of this.
So, so thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you. Appreciate your time. Thank
You. Thank you so much.
Thank you Ms. Lee. Thank you.
Um, Right.
And we're just now hearing from, um,
our midwifery council.
So Leslie's
Yes, it's, I thought I remember,
I think we last time think we watched a few people online.
Alright, thank you for your patience
and I think we've got your, I'll wait
until we get your colleagues online.
Mm-Hmm.
But Jessica, there
hopefully the uh, delay isn't
Yeah, I know, I know.
Kylie's there she was messaging me.
Dunno about Sue
Craig, could you ask people to plead the invitation to be
Promoted? Okay.
So if there's anyone there listening
and you might have an invitation to be promoted,
if you could just push that, please,
then we'll have you all.
Here is, uh, Ms.
Ley Sue
and we're just waiting for Kylie Clark.
Kylie, are you there? Kylie?
Have we got any indication that,
Is she on the,
I just, well, given I,
I'm sure we we're running a little late short time.
Can we, if if it's, if she's not, if you are happy we,
I'm, I'm speaking, I'd just like her
available for getting questions. She's alright.
Yeah. Okay. Well, we'll she coming again.
We'll give it a moment. Yeah,
Well, um, Here we go.
Excellent. Thank you. Well, we have full muster.
Thank you Ms. Clark.
Alright, now just before we begin,
this is obviously we've been here before,
but just, um, this is a remind members that the purpose
of the hearing is to respond to comments
made in the previous hearing.
Thank you. Um, and comments
by witnesses in question from members.
Let's relate it just to those comments, please.
Certainly rather than a re relitigation of the, um,
of the original submission.
Thank you. So with that, look forward to hearing from
You. Appreciate the opportunity.
Um, just, uh, look, I I would,
if you can bear with me, I'll actually read our, um,
submission really for the benefit of anyone listening in,
uh, either right now or um,
or any public record of this hearing in the future.
Um, briefly about the midwifery council.
We are a responsible authority, um,
established under the Health Practitioner's Competence
Assurance Act 2003.
The role of purpose of the, um, of the council is
to regulate midwives to ensure that they're fit for practice
and, um, and that we ensure
that the public is safe in terms of midwifery care
that they receive.
A key part of those functions is
to establish a scope practice which defines, um,
what midwives are able to, and also stance of competence.
So that you need, um, register the midwife, um,
in New Zealand, their practices held against those, um,
standards of stance of competence and those expectations.
I'm here today to talk, uh, to the, in relation
to the petition by Deb Hayes.
And, um, in the oral submission
to the petition's committee in support of Deb Hayes
and on the 12th of September, manini made a number
of allegations about the midwifery council
and the development of the revised scope of practice.
We very much appreciate the opportunity to respond.
Thank you. The primary allegation made by one Manini is
that the council's work to revise scope of practice
for a midwife was closely tied
to the Trans Pregnancy care project,
which was an 18 month study funded
by the Health Research Council.
It was further alleged that individuals involved in
that research project were involved in the revision
of the scope of practice
and that they had significant influence.
It was suggested that the timing
of various events is evidence.
The two projects were working in unison
about the the a t midwifery project.
The council established a collaborative reference group at
the commencement of the
a t midwifery project in 2020.
The role of the collaborative group was
to guide council's review of the regulatory framework
for midwifery practice in New Zealand in 20 August, 2020.
The co-chairs of the collaborative reference group
and three members of the project team meet briefly
with Dr. George Parker, who was involved
with the Trans Pregnancy Project,
but to specifically discuss gender inclusive language.
There was no further record of interaction between the group
and Dr. Parker and no record of any council involvement
with trans pregnancy care project.
We note that the Trans Pregnancy care project report when it
was published, acknowledges 15 organizations who contributed
and participated in that project.
Those organizations include the college midwives,
which is not us now, Maya Maori Midwives, A T OA,
and Pacifica Midwives.
If the council had been involved, we would've expected
to be listed as part of that group.
We were not involved. We also note
that the collaborative restaurant reference group co-chairs
also considered, um,
the New Zealand Psychologist Board's Best Practice guideline
working with sex, sexuality, and gender diverse clients.
So that was a point of reference in terms of the allegation
that council received advice from individuals associated
with trans pregnancy project and other trans research.
These individuals were Dr. George Parker,
who have already mentioned,
and there was a brief one-off interaction with Dr.
Dr. Parker, specifically in relation
to gender inclusive language.
That was all. Dr. Suzanne Miller was also mentioned.
Dr. Miller is co-author of Pregnancy care report,
trans Pregnancy Care Report.
She is an associate professor at Otago Polytechnic is a
practicing midwife and a researcher
and has been involved in many midwifery
related committees and groups.
These include for the New Zealand College of Midwives
as a reviewer, uh,
and the um, midwifery standards review process also
for the College of Midwives midwifery first year
of practice programs.
And she has been an expert advisor to the health
and Disability Commissioner.
Dr. Miller was a member of a professional conduct committee,
um, for council from 2011
to January, 2023.
Professional conduct committees
or p are appointed by, uh,
the council under section 71 of the,
the council may, at its discretion refer matters to relating
to conduct of midwives
to a professional conduct committee.
These committees have power
to investigate the cases referred to under Section 80
and can make recommendations and determinations.
These committees operate independently of council.
They have no involvement in council policy development
or regulatory processes
or any other council functions or activities.
Nor do these committee members have access
to non-public information with within council
or other material other than in relation to the case.
They have been appointed to investigate Dr.
Miller's involvement with the Trans Pregnancy Project
or any other research for
that matter does not preclude her from
being a committee member.
Elizabeth Kerry Carey.
There was some suggestion by Manini that Elizabeth Kerry,
Kerry was involved with the Trans Pregnancy Project
or perhaps other work with Dr. Parker and
therefore had influence on the revised scope of practice.
We have not had any interaction with Dr. Kerry.
Kerry and as stated above, the transparent was stated
previously, the Trans pregnancy project was not linked in
any way to the council's work.
A further person, Dr.
Jamie Vial from Wado University was meant shot.
Manini implied that council had sought advice from Dr.
Vial and that she had been paid for.
This council has not had any interactions with Dr.
Beal and she's unknown to us.
There was some commentary about the council's consideration
of fee feedback that we had
through scope consultation processes,
both the petitioner and Deb Hayes.
Um, and Manini made reference to this
in their written submissions and in their oral submissions.
As noted in our written submission
to the committee dated 21st of June, we did take two rounds
of public consultation.
The first round closed in April 22,
after which we did make, we considered feedback
and we did make adjustments to the revised scope.
So we listened and amended draft was then published
for further consultation in November, 2022.
In relation to the statement by the petitioner
that 90% responses from the second round
of consultation were negative.
It needs to be noted that 342 of the 400 responses,
so 85% were from the public.
At a time when there was significant misinformation in the
media and social media, a number
of these respondents explicitly acknowledged
that the information, the only information
that they had on the scope was via the media.
An example of the misinformation in the public arena at
that time was a claim that the council had decreed
that best breastfeeding would be referred
to as chest feeding.
This is false. The council has never used the term chest
feeding, nor was it ever put forward to council
as a wording option.
As a result, the second round of consultation feedback
describe, as I've described, was significantly different
from the feedback that we received from the first round
of consultation when 95%
of those respondents were from the profession.
So they were midwives, 50%
of those responses respondents were
positive while 50% had concerns
or they recommended changes, which we considered
and acted on as appropriately.
And that feedback lead to further revision in
that second round of consultation in November.
Just to note, in terms of council's deliberation,
applying an equity lens to any policy
or form of decision making
by definition requires more than just
taking a majority view.
That's what equity is about.
There are some other matters that I'll speak to briefly.
There was a question around funding.
Manini questioned the amount of public funding
that was spent on the ATM free project.
The council received no crown funding
and did not receive any funding from any other agency
organization for this project.
There was, um, comments made around the council's use
of re and specifically,
initially we had the intention to Gazette re Maori
language version of the revised scope practice along
with the English version.
And the council at the time sought a translation
of an early draft from the Department of Internal Affairs.
However, it was subsequently decided due to views
regarding accuracy, variations of translation
and considerations of primacy should a misalignment compare,
um, happen between the two versions
to only Gazette an English version
and to publish a Tere Maori version
as a supporting document at later time
from approximately 2020.
Council adopted KAHU
as the Maori term for midwives.
Different iwi use different terms,
but as a national regulator,
the council needed a single term
that we could be used in the national context.
It is unclear what man's objections are to this term.
While kahu is you also used by some midwifery group
and health sector organizations, the use
of this term does not preclude any midwife, entity, group
or person to use other Maori words to define a midwife
or themselves was gifted
and accepted by the midwifery council, uh, with rest of it
to use in its future works and documents, not to eliminate
or dominate any other words that could be used
to describe the work of the midwife.
So we believe those are the key areas, um, allegations, some
of them put to us as questions.
Um, but they were put forward at the oral hearing on
the 12th of September.
And I hope I've left enough time, um, for some questions
and my colleagues online are there to help me if there's any
things that I might seek advice on.
I've got time for a couple questions. Uh,
Well, the questions As to do though, with the,
with the clarifying things
that happened, knock not to do the evidence. So,
You know. Yeah. Clarification.
So I mean,
and that's, I think that was, I mean, again, from the point
of view it was a bit of a scatter gun, um, with the thing.
So I think it's the opportunity to thank you, um,
to do this and putting this together.
Certainly when we now come to put our report forward,
it will be very useful for us.
Thank you. So thank you for doing that. Um, certainly.
Um, and taking the time to come today,
I think once again we're a little late.
Um, but uh, determined by our question time as Ms.
Edley will know,
Can I just ask my colleagues whether there's anything
that you'd like to addition or we'd like to say
or emphasize?
Um, I don't have anything to add, Leslie.
I think you've um, done a great job putting forward our
response to, um, our previous encounter, um, here, uh,
the last time we were there, um,
and responding to the petitioners.
So I don't have anything to add.
Alright. No, I hope you feel like you've had the walkaway
now, the opportunity to make sure that, um,
you've clarified what needed.
Clarification. Thank you.
So look, thank you very much
and uh, thank you for your time this afternoon.